Exploit an Infrastructure “Built to
Build”

Google has spent billions of dollars creating
its internet-based operating platform and developing
proprietary technology. The investment
in infrastructure allows the company to
guarantee specified service levels and subsecond
response times. It also allows Google
to rapidly develop and roll out new services
of its own or its partners’ devising. The proprietary
technology gives the company unprecedented
control over the design and evolution
of its infrastructure (and emergent strategy).
The main attributes of Google’s infrastructure
are these:

Scalability.

While the internet is of course
available to every company, Google has made
major investments to get more out of it and to
construct a proprietary platform that supports
new and growing online services. According
to unofficial but widely reported statistics,
Google owns a network infrastructure consisting
of approximately one million computers;
these run an operating system that allows new
computer clusters to plug in and be globally
recognized and instantly available for use.
The operating software that performs this
magic is a customized version of open source
Linux (which itself is built to make it easy
for third parties to add features of competitive
value).
Another aspect of the infrastructure is that
the internet platform is built to scale. For
example, when Google needs more data
centers, the proprietary operating system
makes them easy to add. And the company
can move data around the world seamlessly
to meet changing user demand. Managing
the petabytes of data Google accumulates
requires special database-management tools.
Because existing commercial systems couldn’t
efficiently support such large volumes of
data, Google developed a proprietary database
called Bigtable, which is tuned to work with
Google’s operating system to process growing
volumes of data quickly and efficiently.

An accelerated product-development life
cycle. 

Google’s infrastructure is well suited to
executing an entire product-development life
cycle rapidly and efficiently. Google engineers
prototype new applications on the platform;
if any of these begin to get users’ attention,
developers can launch beta versions to see
whether the company’s vast captive customer
base responds enthusiastically. If one of the
applications becomes a hit, Google’s enormous
“cloud” of computing capability can
make room for it. In the process of moving
products from the alpha to the beta phase,
Google simultaneously tests and markets
them to the user community. In fact, testing
and marketing are virtually indistinguishable
from one another. This creates a unique
relationship with consumers, who become
an essential part of the development team
as new products take shape and grow.
Google does more than just alpha and beta
test applications—it can host them on its
infrastructure. Google’s customers then transition
seamlessly from testing to using products
as they would any other commercial offering.

Support for third-party development and
mashups. 

Google created its proprietary infrastructure
to be a more efficient and reliable
alternative to the internet, ensuring a better
user experience and higher quality of service.
These purposeful investments in hardware,
operating systems, and database management
enable the company to exert control from end
to end and to enhance such services as Gmail,
Maps, AdWords, and the advertising placement
system AdSense. When Google creates
an application, it pays attention to the way it
will fit into the infrastructure. Google Maps
was therefore architected as a service so that
either the company’s own engineers or those
of third parties could use it as a module to
enrich additional services.
Indeed, Google’s flexible infrastructure acts
as an innovation hub where third parties can
share access and create new applications that
incorporate elements of Google functionality.
These outsiders can easily test and launch applications
and have them hosted in the Google
world, where there is an enormous target
audience—132 million customers globally—
and a practically unlimited capacity for customer
interactions. This benefits both parties:
Google gets its product widely adopted, and
its partners can devote their energies to developing
product functionality important to
their customers. For instance, a real estate
company like Zillow.com can focus on getting
high-quality data on properties that have
been bought and sold, and leave the maps
and display elements to Google or Microsoft.
In exactly this way, third parties browsing
Google’s infrastructure began creating what
are known as mashups—IT applications
that combine data and program functionality
from more than one external source into
an integrated customer experience. For example,
Housingmaps.com combines data from
Craigslist with Google Maps to create an
application that allows users to see apartments
for rent or houses for sale plotted on a
map of the local area. This notion of allowing
useful services to be mixed and matched with
relative ease across organizational boundaries
has interesting implications for the competitive
environment and for organizational efficiency,
engendering a “just try it” class of lean
innovation. (Technically, it is made possible
